feat(sdk): Add use-action hook for SDK (#75327)
metabase/metabase: docs/embedding/sdk/actions.md

---

# Modular embedding SDK - actions

{% include plans-blockquote.html feature="Modular embedding SDK" sdk=true %}

With the `useAction` hook, you can trigger an [action](../../actions/introduction.md) when someone clicks a button or submits a form in your app.

The hook handles the HTTP request, exposes loading and error state as React state, and types the parameters the action expects. Basic CRUD and custom SQL actions are supported; HTTP-type actions are not. Always trigger actions through `useAction` — calling `POST /api/action/:id/execute` directly with `fetch` may be blocked in sandboxed embedding contexts.

## Triggering an action with `useAction`

```ts
const { execute, isExecuting, result, error, reset } = useAction<
  TParameters,
  TKind   // optional — drives the typed `result` shape
>(actionId);
```

- `actionId` — the action's numeric id, its `entity_id` string, or `null`. Find the numeric id in Metabase by opening the action editor and copying it from the URL.
- `TParameters` — a TypeScript type describing the parameters object that will be passed to `execute`. Keys are the action's parameter slugs (the names shown in the action editor).

> - `TKind` (optional) — the action's kind literal. Pass one of `"create"`, `"update"`, `"delete"`, `"bulk"`, or `"sql"` to get a typed `result` for that single shape. Omit it and `result` defaults to a union of every possible response body (`AnyActionResult`), narrowable with `"<key>" in result`. See [Typing the response](#typing-the-response).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `TKind` (optional) — the action's kind literal. Pass one of `"create"`, `"update"`, `"delete"`, `"bulk"`, or `"sql"` to get a typed `result` for that single shape. If you omit `TKind`, `result` defaults to a union of every possible response body (`AnyActionResult`), which you can narrow with `"<key>" in result`. See [Typing the response](#typing-the-response).
```

> - `execute(parameters)` — call this from an event handler to trigger the action. The hook does not auto-fire on mount. Resolves to the response body on success, throws on failure, or resolves to `null` if `actionId` is `null` or the SDK is not yet initialized. You can `await` it or fire and forget — the same error is written to `error` state either way, so a render-time error message will appear even without a `try`/`catch`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `execute(parameters)` — call `execute` from an event handler to trigger the action. The hook doesn't auto-fire on mount. Resolves to the response body on success, throws on failure, or resolves to `null` if `actionId` is `null`, or the SDK isn't yet initialized. You can `await execute(parameters)` or fire and forget. The same error is written to `error` state either way, so a render-time error message will appear even without a `try`/`catch`.
```

> - `isExecuting` — `true` between the call and its resolution. Use it to disable the trigger and prevent double-clicks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `isExecuting` — `true` between the call and its resolution. Use `isExecuting` to disable the trigger and prevent double-clicks.
```

- `result` — the response body, or `null` before the first call and after `reset()`.
- `error` — the last thrown error, or `null`. See [Error handling](#error-handling).
- `reset()` — clears `result` and `error`.

#### API Reference

- [Hook](./api/useAction.html)
- [Return type](./api/UseActionResult.html)

## Example button to trigger an action

This button calls a custom SQL action to apply a discount to an order:

```typescript
{% include_file "{{ dirname }}/snippets/actions/basic.tsx" %}
```

## Parameter keys

**Send parameters keyed by `slug`**. The parameter's display `name` (e.g. `"Discount"`) won't work; you must use the slug (e.g., `"discount"`).

### Parameter value types

You can pass strings, number, and boolean parameters. For dates, pass an ISO 8601 string. Examples:

```typescript
{% include_file "{{ dirname }}/snippets/actions/parameter-values.tsx" snippet="primitives-and-dates" %}
```

#### Dates and timezones

> When the target column is `TIMESTAMP` without timezone, send the ISO value **without a timezone offset**, or with the `Z` suffix:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the target column is `TIMESTAMP` without timezone, send the ISO value either _without a timezone offset_, or with the `Z` suffix:
```

| `"bulk"`           | Any bulk variant (bulk create / update / delete) | `{ success: boolean; "rows-created"?: number; "rows-updated"?: number; "rows-deleted"?: number }` |
| `"sql"`            | Custom SQL action                                | `{ "rows-affected": number }`                                                                     |

#### API Reference

- [ActionKind](./api/ActionKind.html)
- [AnyActionResult](./api/AnyActionResult.html)
- [ActionResultForKind](./api/ActionResultForKind.html)
- [ActionResultForCreate](./api/ActionResultForCreate.html)
- [ActionResultForUpdate](./api/ActionResultForUpdate.html)
- [ActionResultForDelete](./api/ActionResultForDelete.html)
- [ActionResultForBulk](./api/ActionResultForBulk.html)
- [ActionResultForSql](./api/ActionResultForSql.html)

Example with a known kind:

```typescript
{% include_file "{{ dirname }}/snippets/actions/typed-response.tsx" snippet="known-kind" %}
```

### Reading the result

It's common not to read the result at all (see [Refreshing data after an action](#refreshing-data-after-an-action)).

> But if you do read the result, specify `TKind` if you know the action's result upfront.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But if you do read the result, specify `TKind` if you know the action's result up front.
```

If you don't supply `TKind`, the `result` defaults to `AnyActionResult`, which is the union of every possible response body. TypeScript knows the result is one of the five known shapes, just not which one. You can then narrow with the `in` operator:

```typescript
{% include_file "{{ dirname }}/snippets/actions/typed-response.tsx" snippet="narrow-result" %}
```

The union default catches mistyped reads: if the type system can't prove `result` has a key, it'll error.

> ## Refreshing data after an action

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## After an action succeeds, you must refresh the data
```

```typescript
{% include_file "{{ dirname }}/snippets/actions/with-refresh.tsx" %}
```

If a single action invalidates more than one view, drive every dependent question off the same `refreshKey` so one state bump remounts them all and they re-query together:

```typescript
{% include_file "{{ dirname }}/snippets/actions/parallel-refresh.tsx" snippet="parallel-refresh" %}
```

Don't try to drive the state from `result` directly. The response body is for confirmation (a row count, the inserted row's primary key, etc.). You can use the `result` for toasts or detail-view navigation, but you still need to re-read the source to update the data on screen.

## Error handling

The hook normalizes whatever the underlying network client throws into a clean, public-facing shape and types `error` accordingly:

{% include_file "{{ dirname }}/api/snippets/ActionExecuteError.md" snippet="properties" %}

`error.status` is **optional**: present for HTTP-level failures (4xx / 5xx), absent for transport-layer failures (offline, aborted) where no HTTP response was received. The actionable diagnostic for end users lives at `error.data.message`.

> `error.data.errors` is a per-field map (`{ <slug>: <message> }`) when the backend reports parameter-level validation failures, keyed by the same parameter slugs you pass to `execute`. For whole-request failures (e.g. a foreign-key constraint) it is an empty `{}` and the message lives in `error.data.message`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`error.data.errors` is a per-field map (`{ <slug>: <message> }`) when the backend reports parameter-level validation failures, keyed by the same parameter slugs you pass to `execute`. For whole-request failures (like a foreign-key constraint), it's an empty `{}` and the message lives in `error.data.message`.
```

#### API Reference

- [ActionExecuteError](./api/ActionExecuteError.html)

> For SQL or driver errors, `error.data.message` often includes a newline and the failing SQL statement on the next line, so render it inside an element with `white-space: pre-wrap` (a `<pre>` is fine) — a `<span>` collapses the newlines into one wall of text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For SQL or driver errors, `error.data.message` often includes a newline and the failing SQL statement on the next line, so render the error message inside an element with `white-space: pre-wrap` (a `<pre>` is fine). A `<span>` collapses the newlines into one wall of text.
```

The basic example above renders `error.data.message` with a static fallback when no message was provided:

```typescript
{% include_file "{{ dirname }}/snippets/actions/basic.tsx" snippet="error-render" %}
```

> Surface the message verbatim. Don't replace it with a generic "Something went wrong" — the raw SQL / validation / permission error is what tells the user how to fix their input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Display the error message verbatim. Don't replace the message with a generic "Something went wrong". The raw SQL / validation / permission error is what tells the person how to fix their input.
```

---
title: "Modular embedding SDK - actions"

> summary: Trigger pre-existing Metabase actions (basic CRUD or custom SQL) from your embedded application with the `useAction` hook.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
summary: Trigger Metabase actions from your embedded application with the `useAction` hook.
```

---

# Modular embedding SDK - actions

{% include plans-blockquote.html feature="Modular embedding SDK" sdk=true %}

A Metabase [action](../../actions/introduction.md) is a server-defined write operation against the data warehouse — a basic CRUD operation on a model (insert / update / delete a row) or a custom SQL command. Actions are configured in Metabase ahead of time. Your embedded app's job is to trigger them when a user does something, like clicking a button or submitting a form.

> The `useAction` hook is the SDK's path for invoking those pre-existing actions. It handles the HTTP request, exposes loading and error state as React state, and types the parameters the action expects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the `useAction` hook, you can trigger an [action](../../actions/introduction.md) when someone clicks a button or submits a form in your app.
```

- `TKind` (optional) — the action's kind literal. Pass one of `"create"`, `"update"`, `"delete"`, `"bulk"`, or `"query"` to get a typed `result` for that single shape. Omit it and `result` defaults to a union of every possible response body (`AnyActionResult`), narrowable with `"<key>" in result`. See [Typing the response](#typing-the-response).
- `execute(parameters)` — call this from an event handler to trigger the action. Resolves to the response body on success, throws on failure, or resolves to `null` if `actionId` is `null` or the SDK is not yet initialized. The same error is also written to `error` state so render-time consumers can read it.
- `isExecuting` — `true` between the call and its resolution. Use it to disable the trigger and prevent double-clicks.
- `result` — the response body, or `null` before the first call and after `reset()`.
- `error` — the last thrown error, or `null`. See [Error handling](#error-handling).
- `reset()` — clears `result` and `error`.

#### API Reference

- [Hook](./api/useAction.html)
- [Return type](./api/UseActionResult.html)

> ## Example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Example button to trigger an action
```

> A button that calls a custom SQL action to apply a discount to an order:

Reviewer: Thi
```suggestion
This button calls a custom SQL action to apply a discount to an order:
```

```typescript
{% include_file "{{ dirname }}/snippets/actions/basic.tsx" %}
```

## Parameter keys

Every Metabase action publishes a `parameters` list. Each parameter has two identifiers you can use as a key:

| Field   | Example                                  | Notes                                                                     |
| ------- | ---------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `id`    | `"d800e41d-edde-49cb-b63b-2386aba34334"` | Internal UUID for custom SQL actions. For basic CRUD actions, the id is the slug-form. |

Reviewer: Formatting.

| `slug`  | `"discount"`                             | Stable, human-readable. What the Metabase action editor surfaces.          |

> **Send parameters keyed by `slug`** — that is the public contract. The backend execute endpoint accepts keys by `slug` or internal `id` and resolves them to the destination parameter, so both work; slug is what shows up in the action editor and what your code should use. The parameter's display `name` (e.g. `"Discount"`) is UI-only and is not accepted as a request key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Send parameters keyed by `slug`**.  The parameter's display `name` (e.g. `"Discount"`) won't work; you must use the slug (e.g., `"discount"`).
```

The original makes it seem like we shouldn't use ID. Why mention ID?

### Parameter value types

> For string, number, and boolean parameters, just pass the natural TypeScript value. For dates, pass an ISO 8601 string. Examples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can pass strings, number, and boolean parameters. For dates, pass an ISO 8601 string. Examples:
```

```typescript
{% include_file "{{ dirname }}/snippets/actions/parameter-values.tsx" snippet="primitives-and-dates" %}
```

#### Dates and timezones

> When the target column is `TIMESTAMP` without timezone (the common Metabase case — values stored as UTC by convention), send the ISO value **without a timezone offset**, or with the `Z` suffix:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the target column is `TIMESTAMP` without timezone, send the ISO value **without a timezone offset**, or with the `Z` suffix:
```

```typescript
{% include_file "{{ dirname }}/snippets/actions/date-picker.tsx" snippet="timestamp-utc" %}
```

> A timezone-offset value like `"2024-01-15T10:00:00+05:00"` is silently converted to UTC by the database driver, so the stored wall-clock shifts (the example above would store `05:00:00`). For `TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE` columns the offset is preserved as the same instant; for `DATE` columns timezone is irrelevant.

Reviewer: Is this the case for all data warehouses that support actions?

- [ActionResultForKind](./api/ActionResultForKind.html)
- [ActionResultForCreate](./api/ActionResultForCreate.html)
- [ActionResultForUpdate](./api/ActionResultForUpdate.html)
- [ActionResultForDelete](./api/ActionResultForDelete.html)
- [ActionResultForBulk](./api/ActionResultForBulk.html)
- [ActionResultForQuery](./api/ActionResultForQuery.html)

Example with a known kind:

```typescript
{% include_file "{{ dirname }}/snippets/actions/typed-response.tsx" snippet="known-kind" %}
```

### Omitting `TKind`

If you don't supply `TKind`, `result` defaults to `AnyActionResult` — the union of every possible response body. This is more accurate than the loose `Record<string, unknown>` you might expect: TypeScript knows the result is one of the five known shapes, just not which one. Narrow with the `in` operator:

```typescript
{% include_file "{{ dirname }}/snippets/actions/typed-response.tsx" snippet="narrow-result" %}
```

The union default catches mistyped reads — `result?.["rows-affected"]` errors directly if the type system can't prove `result` has that key. Specifying `TKind` is the clean way out when you know the action's kind upfront.

> If you don't read `result` at all (the common case — see [Refreshing data after an action](#refreshing-data-after-an-action)), neither variant matters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Reading the result

It's common not to read the result at all (see [Refreshing data after an action](#refreshing-data-after-an-action).

But if you do read the result, and specify `TKind` if you know the action's result upfront.

If you don't supply `TKind`, the `result` defaults to `AnyActionResult`, which is the union of every possible response body. TypeScript knows the result is one of the five known shapes, just not which one. You can then narrow with the `in` operator:

```typescript
{% include_file "{{ dirname }}/snippets/actions/typed-response.tsx" snippet="narrow-result" %}
```

The union default catches mistyped reads: if the type system can't prove `result` has a key, it'll error.  
```

## Refreshing data after an action

When an action succeeds, the data on the screen is likely stale. A list still shows the old rows; a stat tile still shows the old count; the row the user just edited still shows its old values. The action worked, but the UI lies — and there is no automatic refresh.

> **The rule:** after `execute` resolves successfully, refresh every piece of data on the screen that the action could have changed. Load the data hook above the action trigger so its `refetch` callback can be passed down:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Refreshing data after an action

When an action succeeds, you'll need to refresh any data in the UI that the action could have changed, otherwise the data on screen may be stale. There is no automatic refresh.

After `execute` resolves successfully, load the data hook above the action trigger so its `refetch` callback can be passed down:
```

```typescript
{% include_file "{{ dirname }}/snippets/actions/with-refresh.tsx" %}
```

If a single action invalidates more than one view, kick off the refreshes in parallel and `await` them together so the user sees a single coherent flip from stale to fresh:

```typescript
{% include_file "{{ dirname }}/snippets/actions/parallel-refresh.tsx" snippet="parallel-refresh" %}
```

> Don't try to drive list state from `result` directly. The response body is for confirmation (a row count, the inserted row's primary key, etc.) — use it for toasts or detail-view navigation, not as a substitute for re-reading the source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Don't try to drive the state from `result` directly. The response body is for confirmation (a row count, the inserted row's primary key, etc.). You can use the `result` for toasts or detail-view navigation, but you still need to re-read the source to update the data on screen.
```

## Error handling

> The hook normalizes whatever the underlying network client throws into a clean, public-facing shape and types `error` accordingly — no casting required to read its fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The hook normalizes whatever the underlying network client throws into a clean, public-facing shape and types `error` accordingly:
```

{% include_file "{{ dirname }}/api/snippets/ActionExecuteError.md" snippet="properties" %}

`error.status` is **optional**: present for HTTP-level failures (4xx / 5xx), absent for transport-layer failures (offline, aborted) where no HTTP response was received. The actionable diagnostic for end users lives at `error.data.message`.

#### API Reference

- [ActionExecuteError](./api/ActionExecuteError.html)

For SQL or driver errors, `error.data.message` often includes a newline and the failing SQL statement on the next line, so render it inside an element with `white-space: pre-wrap` (a `<pre>` is fine) — a `<span>` collapses the newlines into one wall of text.

The basic example above renders `error.data.message` with a static fallback when no message was provided:

```typescript
{% include_file "{{ dirname }}/snippets/actions/basic.tsx" snippet="error-render" %}
```

> Surface the message verbatim. Don't replace it with a generic "Something went wrong" — the raw SQL / validation / permission error is what tells the user how to fix their input.

Reviewer: > Surface the message verbatim. Don't replace it with a generic "Something went wrong" — the raw SQL / validation / permission error is what tells the user how to fix their input.

This doesn't seem right. Some app user clicks a button or fills out a form, and we're recommending we show them the SQL error?

Author: This is what happens in the Metabase itself for actions.

Ideally of course to have a proper error

Author: let me think about it

Author: We discussed with @NevRA , decided to keep it as is, as it's tricky to do in other way

https://metaboat.slack.com/archives/C063Q3F1HPF/p1781109638898889?thread_ts=1781109138.304729&cid=C063Q3F1HPF

> ## Notes on `useAction`

Reviewer: These notes shouldn't be quarantined to this section; they should appear inline where relevant.
